Call the meeting to order.
Thank you. Um,
and I will have the superintendent do the call
to order roll and the roll.
Call
DeAngelos. Here.
Dowling. Feller. Here.
Holman. Here. Richardson. Here. Rish. Here.
Smith. Here. Kaa. Here. Davidson.
And just to let folks know that Vice Chair, uh, Dowling
and student, uh,
member Davidson are both not feeling well this evening.
So that's why they're not in attendance.
So I apologize for them.
But, uh, both of them felt like it was better
to keep the rest of us safe and, uh, stay at home.
So, um, if you're interested in, uh,
joining us for the Pledge of Allegiance, you can do so now.
Thank you.
I pledge allegiance.
It's always, I pledge allegiance to the flag,
the United States of America,
and to the Republic for which it stands,
one nation under God, indivisible,
with liberty and justice for all.
Thank you. The first
test, just,
Uh, I'm just going to give some dates that are important
for people to, uh, put on their calendar.
First. Tomorrow night, the uh,
school board will have their preliminary budget discussion
with the city council, and
that will be in city Council chambers.
Tomorrow at six 30, uh, at public meeting,
everyone is invited again.
Um, Monday, February 23rd at five 30,
there will be an executive session, uh,
at the South Portland High School Learning Commons.
And the point of the executive session is for the board
to determine a base salary for the incoming superintendent,
uh, who we don't have yet,
but when that person does arrive, uh, special meeting
following that is when Zeal will do a presentation on the
superintendent leadership profile.
And again, a public meeting,
but it will be in the, um, learning Commons.
Then there will be, uh,
there will be a budget workshop on Monday, March 2nd, here
in the, uh, lecture hall.
A regular meeting Monday, March 9th.
Another budget workshop. I mean, I'm sorry.
It'll be a board workshop, uh,
which will be on non-biased training for hiring.
And that's going to be done for the board by Jimenez,
Gilda Paolo, um, on Wednesday,
March 18th at five 15.
And that will be until eight 15.
That was postponed from February 4th. Again, public meeting.
Anybody is welcome.
Who wants to come and watch what we're going to learn about.
Uh, and then there will be a second budget workshop
March 23rd and another one March 30th.
So those are just all dates that are on the agenda
and, uh, important for you to keep track of
as we move forward in this.
Um, we do have an action item here,
and there is a copy of it on everybody's, uh,
place of seating, which is a support
for the South Portland City Council.
Resolve number 5 25 26.
And the board did pass a resolve that, um, can be read
by anyone, and it,
there should be a link on the school website as well.
But it was entitled the City Council
of South Portland Resolution
regarding Federal Immigration Enforcement activity
and Community Safety and Wellbeing.
And, uh, there was a significant amount of discussion
and debate and an amendment to that motion
that asked the council to forward requests to the governor
for, um, a,
a moratorium on rent evictions
for 60 days that did pass.
And this action item will be just for the school board
to give support for that.
I wanna say at the same time that I think the superintendent
and the leadership team
and all of the staff have worked really hard
to do an amazing job in keeping our population safe
and secure and having a plan in place.
And I want on behalf of the board
to give my appreciation for all of that.
And, uh, we know that it's not over
and it continues to be
a significant issue in this community.
Um, but I trust that everyone is being
participatory and as helpful as possible.
There's people who are driving people back and forth to work
and donating, delivering food
and getting kids, uh, safely to and from bus stops.
I was delivering some food up in the Brick Hill area
and stopped to thank two adults
who were standing at the bus stops in receiving students
as they were coming, uh, on and off the bus.
So I know there's a great effort.
I know there's a lot of, uh, outreach that's happening,
and, um, I just wanna express my gratitude for that.
So thank you. Uh, there
we do have an action item for a formal proposal
for a redesign for our elementary school's, um,
grade level configuration,
and we'll talk about that when we get to that action item.
And we are up to the report of the student representative.
And Angela, that's to you.
Thank you. Good evening everyone,
and thank you for being here tonight.
Starting off at South Wind High School,
students have shown strong leadership
and care for their community
through a new student led initiative
called The Little Kitchen.
This project was created to support families
and neighbors who are unable to leave their homes
during recent community challenges
located near the cafeteria
and the lecture hall, the little kitchen provides food
and essential items for anybody in need.
Students are organizing donations, setting up spaces,
and encouraging others to take items for themselves
or to deliver them to neighbors.
This initiative reflects the compassion
and responsibilities our students continue to show
for one another and the broader community.
Last week, the high school also hosted a Black
History Month student panel.
In celebration of Black History Month,
students shared personal experiences, they identity
and history, and engage in meaningful conversations about
culture and leadership.
The event created space for reflection, celebration
and learning across the school community.
Looking ahead, students are preparing
for the first ever South Point High School will Cup
Tournament taking place
after school during the week of March 19,
March 9th to March 13th.
The championship game will be played during commu
during Community Week on April 16th
in front of the entire school.
I'm very excited about that. And teams of five
mixed gender students can sign up
and donations up to $25 per team are appreciated,
but not required as the event will raise
funds for the senior class.
Winter athletics are also wrapping up
with many teams heading into postseason competition
and continuing to re to represent the school with Pride.
As South Berlin High Middle Schools,
students have made strong academic gains in reading
and math based on winter assessment data,
particularly those receiving
additional intervention support.
The school will host its Shark Team Learning night on
February 10th to help families learn ways
to support students as at home as well.
Winter athletics at sophomore
and middle school have also been, um, active
with basketball, finishing up volleyball beginning
and indoor track swimming and unified basketball underway.
At Kaler Elementary School,
students have been learning about Olympic events
and created a collaborative bulletin board celebrating
teamwork and perseverance.
At Brown School, students are sharing messages about
what they love about their school
and will celebrate a school-wide reading incentive.
Later this month at Dyer,
they have launched a friendship festival focused on
kindness, community helpers
and school spirit Teachers across the elementary level
continue to use professional development time
to strengthen small group instruction
and support the student learning.
And lastly, south Portland Adult Education has spent the
past month responding
to the recent increase in immigration
enforcement in the area.
And in response to student input,
English language acquisition classes we're moved
to remote instruction using WhatsApp
and will remain remote through February 13th.
Adult education continues working on plans
to strengthen remote learning options in case in-person
instruction is disrupted again,
and access to technology remains a need.
And thanks to the support from the district
and community partners,
a hundred reliable low cost Chromebooks were secured
to support consistent learning.
Three additional students passed the high set this month,
and the program has now doubled its number
of high set graduates compared to last year
and at, at this time.
And lastly, across the district, we continue to see growth
and strong community engagement.
Thank you for your continued support
of our students in schools.
Thank you. Any questions for Angela?
I should say board member Kabi. Sorry,
I have a question about the adult education.
Um, is there a reassessment, well, I guess first question,
is there a February break for adult ed
and will they will, um, learning resume in person
after the break, assuming there is a break?
Angela, I don't think you can.
I'm really, I'm really like thinking that this is
for the superintendent, so
I think, I think Joe has the answer here.
Okay, thank you. Sure.
Johanna Prince, assistant superintendent,
and yes, adult education does take us spring break
and at this point they are planning to return to in-person
instruction following the, the,
it's not spring break, it's winter break. It's really cold
Out. This is spring. We're
in big trouble,
Uh, February break.
Uh, they're planning on the 23rd to return
to in-person instruction, obviously, should the local,
you know, culture and climate change,
they would reassess that.
Thanks. Thank you. Uh, two other things
that I forgot to say.
First, I forgot to give the opening statement.
So I will give that, uh, as this is a public proceeding,
unless the Board of Education specifically votes
to enter into executive session, the public has the right
to hear everything and to look at all exhibits.
Please let us know if you experience any
difficulties with accessibility.
We have members of the district staff present to help you.
The school board works from a prepared agenda,
which should be present in the room,
and it's posted in advance on the district website.
This evening's agenda are available near the entrance
of the lecture hall.
Sure. Uh, fellow board members just remember
that Robert's rule states that no member may speak, uh,
more than twice on the same question at any one meeting
except for permission by the chair.
And questions, brief suggestions
or points of clarification are not counted as speaking.
The only other thing I would say is we are in the two days
where, because in the midst of everything else
that's going on in the community, we're also, uh,
in the throes of doing our superintendent search.
And, uh, the Zeal team, two of the members
of the Zeal team are present on site today and tomorrow.
That schedule is on the, the district website.
And there's opportunities for people to participate.
Uh, both, there's some virtual opportunities, but they're,
but they're on site to meet with people.
And there's a schedule that puts them at, um,
all the individual schools
and meeting with community leaders
and with, uh, the superintendent's leadership team as well.
There will be, there is a link on the school website also
for anyone to participate in thought exchange.
So there's another opportunity.
So we encourage you to partake in those
chances to give us feedback.
We really care about what the community
and what the, uh, staff has to say about our search.
And we encourage you to, to ask your neighbors
and your friends to participate as well,
because the more input we have, the better we will be, uh,
in our pursuit of a candidate.
So, uh, we'll be doing, the board will be doing interviews
later in the month of April,
but, so the posting is coming up
and that's what that, that leadership profile is
that will be presented, um,
publicly on the 23rd of February.
So, um, we are now to the, uh,
report of the superintendent.
So, uh, tonight, uh, we have a
number of reports.
Um, I do have one announcement that I will, uh, cover
and then we'll move into the reports.
And the budget update will actually be done by Abigail Chen,
and she will do that, um, under the, uh,
finance committee report Out time.
Uh, the one recognition is to our
South Portland School counselors, um, uh,
and recognition for all the good work that they do
and all of the important work they do.
This is school counseling week, February 2nd
through the sixth.
Um, the first report is Dr.
Rebecca Stern, uh, middle school principal
and Liana Popkin, uh, community school director.
Um, they are going to be, uh, talking
with us about the community school strategy expansion
and introduction to the Education Foundation.
Um, I've been a part
of this conversation since the beginning of the, the year.
It's been an exciting one,
and it's great to see you at this juncture.
So, Dr. Stern,
This slide.
Okay. You'll forward our slides for
Him. You just kind of
gimme the look. Ah,
Perfect. Great.
Uh, hello. Thanks for having us.
Um, I'm Rebecca Stern.
I'm the principal of the middle school,
Leonna Popkin Community
School Director at the middle school.
Um, and we are next slide, please.
We are very happy to be here.
Um, superintendent
and Whistle, if you could forward
to the next slide, that would be great.
Um, we are really happy to be here today
to talk about the community school model
that exists at South Portland Middle School
and how we, um, you have a vote, in fact in front
of you tonight, about the possible expansion of that model
to our other schools in the district.
Very slowly and over time, um, we started
as a middle school looking into the community school model
because of some of the incredible problems
that schools face, including chronic absenteeism,
youth mental health concerns, academic disparities,
and then outside of school issues as well,
including housing insecurity and funding gaps.
And these are issues that impact kids in schools daily
and that schools can't overcome alone.
Um, we have,
and we will share a lot of this information
with you shortly, we have used the community school model
to address those overlapping issues at the middle
school with great success.
Um, so at this time, um, with the support
of the admin team in the district, um, as well
as some community partners, we are proposing scaling up
that model to impact all of the other schools.
Um, and then to support that scale up, um,
our community partners are hoping
to develop an education foundation whose mission would be
to support the community school, um, model
and initiative in all schools.
So it's a, it's a two part solution, um, that we're here
to discuss with you tonight.
Okay. I'm pushing it. So why we're here,
Well, How did we
Get here? The next slide
is a history of how did we get Oh, great.
So you might have to do a lot of clicking
because I didn't want the whole timeline to show up at once,
but now that I'm not in charge, maybe I wish it,
it would your head Great.
Perfect.
This is working better. I think
This is great.
So in the fall of 2022, um, there was a lot of COVID money
and the city of South Portland awarded an, um, uh,
what was an ARPA grant?
Um, the recovery plan money, um, from COVID monies
to South Portland Middle School, I'm sorry,
to Memorial Middle School at the time, uh,
and the Opportunity Alliance.
And it was an enormous grant of $664,000.
And that's how this got started.
Um, we began our work in that school.
Year 2223, we developed an advisory board
of community partners, and we did a big needs
and assets assessment and looked at chronic absenteeism
and sense of belonging as our priorities for focus.
Uh, the next year we opened South Portland Middle School
as a community school.
We had finished our needs
and assets report,
which is the first thing a community school does in the main
Department of Education.
Awarded us another $90,000 grant
to continue support of the work.
We were fully implemented last year, uh,
with another grant from the Maine DOE,
and we began to really see some positive outcomes
for students and families at that time.
We started as George, uh, superintendent
and whistle mentioned earlier,
a serious conversation about an education
foundation this fall.
Um, we have some really engaged community members.
I'm not sure if any of them are able
to be here with us tonight.
We do have some here. Wonderful.
Um, who are really committed to how can we support the work
of the district, um, through an education foundation similar
to other districts, um,
they would be a nonprofit organization.
They would be able to raise and leverage money
and supports in ways that a school district can't.
Um, and that group has been really incredible.
And we are, they are planning to launch July one,
which is really exciting.
Uh, and their mission is to support this model of education
because it is such a wraparound model.
And then, last but not least, here we are today in February
of 2026, and
before you is a school board vote on all
of our schools becoming community schools.
This is important for two reasons.
Main statute requires, uh, the school board votes on
or approves schools being community schools.
Um, in particular, if you want to be eligible
for state funding to be a community school to apply
for state funding as a school, the next round of funding,
um, the grant application is due on Thursday,
and that application is
for $50,000 in the first year per school
and $50,000 in the second year per school.
So you will see in our proposal
that we are suggesting the high school become the next
school to take on this model.
So we would be applying with your vote for two schools.
Um, so possibly a $100,000 a year
for each of the next two years.
So briefly, what is a community school?
It's a school that, um, the name is very generic,
but it's actually a pretty specific model.
It serves as a hub that responds
to the unique needs of a community.
Its goal is to reduce barriers, uh, so that,
that kids can really focus
and access their education when they're at school.
School. We integrate academics with health, social,
and community services,
and it really is an organizational structure.
Um, when we had all of the crises that were happening, um,
with ice enforcement over the past month,
we were really able to harness, um, the power
of the community school model to quickly organize resources
and partner with the community organization SoPo help to,
to really support a lot of families.
So there's, it's a, a lot about
infrastructure for efficiency.
Um, it is a strategy, not a program.
Every single community school is different.
It depends on the needs of the kids
and the families in that community.
Okay. Um, so I, there is a short video,
um, chair DeAngelo.
We could show the video. It's two minutes and 47 seconds.
Okay, great. I think it will do a good job explaining
what a community school is.
So I think you're gonna have to click again,
and then There should be a little play
button in the middle, and
then it should play.
Or you could click the link at the top
where it says Community school playbook.
This is, now we're really getting into dicey territory.
It's not gonna work. Oh.
Or we could call our, uh,
Technology or we could call on our tech guru
to see if it will work.
If it won't work, you can look at it later. It's very short.
Uh, and very clear about what community schools are.
Let's see here. It's all right.
We don't need to watch it. My
Computer shows it.
It's right there. It's right there.
This, you keep this so dark.
That's okay. We can go to the next slide.
Hold on, hold on. It's just fine.
I do encourage all of you to look at it though. It's great.
Why does mine show in yours, son?
Dunno. Okay, we're gonna go on.
Perfect. So now we'll go to slide
12 1 1 more try.
Here. There's something about
to over Just a click.
I know. Oh, click.
It's a long history
with Microsoft Control.
Click. Is that it?
There is a, the video is linked down, down below.
If you scroll down, watch the video.
Watch the video. There it is.
Sure. And now we need sound
Two,
Working Together to realize a shared vision.
This is the school every student needs.
This is a community school.
Community Schools are public schools that partner
with stakeholders to create the conditions
students need to thrive.
Community schools can be found across the United States,
and their numbers are growing fast.
But what exactly makes a school a community school?
They integrate student supports, clinics, counselors,
and other services ensure each
and every student is ready to learn.
They expand and enrich learning.
Extended school days, summer programs
and real world experiences help students reach their
full potential.
They engage families
and communities, partnering with residents to identify
and meet community needs.
Makes everyone feel safe, welcome and involved in school.
They lead in collaboration, inclusive decision making,
and peer learning builds trust among students, educators,
families, and communities.
When a school stands on these four pillars,
it's a community school
research supports this four pillar approach,
but there's no one size fits all model.
Every community school is different
because each community is different.
Figuring out what it looks like in your community starts
by getting actual community members involved.
That's the full-time job of community school coordinators.
They're the human bridge connecting all the partners
and stakeholders that make community schools possible.
So that's what makes a school a community school.
Now, how do you pay for it?
Startup costs, like hiring a full-time coordinator can be
raised from foundations or state and local governments.
Tapping into existing funding
and partnering with local businesses can bring
in service providers.
Sharing resources
and staff with partners can help everyone do more.
And as a community school becomes more established.
Leaders can advocate for budgets that sustain their impact
and new funding to expand it.
Every community school is different.
What will yours be like?
Get started at community schools dot future
for learning.org.
Great.
Calculus is hard because it is different.
It introduces completely new concepts.
So there are a number of reasons why
community schools work.
Uh, as the video said, they're responsive
that every school is different.
Uh, they are offer, they offer hyper local solutions.
They're holistic. They address root causes
and support the whole child.
Uh, very importantly, in in the budget season,
they are extremely cost effective.
A dollar invested, uh, leads
to an estimated over $7 in benefit.
Uh, and they work because schools
and communities are that we're the same people.
And so when we work together across all of the generations,
um, we do better work.
Next slide, please. Um, they have nationally proven results.
This study that was just published in California, um,
where there are lots and lots of community schools,
improved test scores, reduced chronic absenteeism,
reduced suspension rates, um,
and there are very, very large gains
among historically underserved students.
So we're really focusing on students, um,
for this from opportunity
and, um, seeing results for all students.
So there is a link there to that study,
which we are not going to click now,
but you can do that on your own time.
Um, the next few slides are about the results
that we've seen at South Portland Middle School
over the past three years.
Um, and Liana is gonna present those.
Um, so the first result you'll see is, uh,
we more than have chronic absenteeism since, uh,
since opening in 22, 23.
Um, and also you can see
that's quite a bit lower than the statewide average as well.
Um, and when we talk about some of these results
that seem very school-based, I think it's helpful also
to kind of think about how,
how those impact the entire community,
how this has a ripple effect.
And so when you think about reduced middle school
absenteeism, we know that, that the research shows that
that leads to higher graduation rates.
Um, and what we know about higher graduation rates,
which many of you probably already know, is that leads
to a, a skilled workforce.
Lower unemployment and poverty rates improved public health,
reduced crime rates, and stronger social mobility.
So some pretty good outcomes. Next one.
Um, last year we also really focused on family engagement.
Came up with a family engagement strategy,
family events, just being one of those.
Um, so we went from three events a year to 11, uh,
and saw a 22% increase just in our,
our parent-teacher conference participation.
Um, again, increased family engagement leads
to higher graduation rates.
Um, we also know
how beneficial outta school time programs are.
Uh, and this is one of those examples of
where things are mutually beneficial for our, our students,
as well as for our community organizations.
Some of these programs have trouble getting
students to come to them.
And so we are able to open our doors, welcome them in,
partner them, partner with them in really effective ways,
increase the diversity of students
that they were typically attracting to their programs, um,
and, and really just broaden the reach for everyone.
Uh, and so again, you look at more afterschool programming
has these incredible results for, for students.
Next one. Um, as they mentioned in the video, uh,
thinking about students' health needs.
So we were in just our second year
of having a school-based health center at the middle school.
We had almost a thousand visits
to the school-based health center.
Um, and about 37% of our students were enrolled.
Uh, and so, you know, if, if you're a parent who's ever had
to take their child to a dentist appointment at 11:00 AM
or wait nine months for an eye appointment,
you can imagine why this would be really helpful to you.
Next slide. Um,
and you know, particularly prescient
for what's going on right now, um,
we have a great partnership with the locker project.
That's just one example of a partnership we have
where we were able to move 13,000
or 7,000 pounds of, of food
and 6,000 snacks to students directly.
Um, um, just because of our close relationship with them.
And so we were able to do
that in a way that felt really low barrier.
Um, students didn't feel like they were being targeted
or identified, and they had a lot of choice.
Um, and that was able to reduce some food insecurity.
Uh, also very excitingly, we are starting
to see some impact
of the community school model on our academic achievement,
which is one of the indicators
that slower to grow over time.
You can see, um, this is just one data point on our,
our students' math scores, and they are growing over time
and predicted for the spring nwas to be, um, right on track
for that continued growth.
And the same is true also in reading,
which is really exciting.
The, the goal, of course, is to
support students' academic achievement
at, at the end of the day.
And so we're excited to see
that we appear to be seeing that impact.
Next slide. So why we're here, again,
this is a scalable solution.
There are thousands of community schools.
Uh, our story is replicable.
It is scalable in this district throughout all
of South Portland.
Um, our proposal as a team is to start with the high school
and use those community school strategies also
to inform our transition with, um, CDS, the coming
of the three and four year olds coming into the district.
So what does it look like to partner
with families at a very young age,
their first school experience to do this model,
which is really empowering for families,
and how do we expand up to the high school?
And then over time, starting to think about
what would it look like in our elementary schools
to have this model as well.
Um, all of our schools are already community hubs.
This is a way to strategize
and organize them so that we can be more efficient
as a district and supporting our families.
Um, and we can really help further the mission
of community organizations.
Some of the businesses, um, city government
and our schools, we all serve the same
families in our district.
Uh, and so being able to have
that consistent approach throughout a a child's time here
feels really important.
So there are some financial implications.
Um, the school board
and the, you know, administrative team need to be committed
to this strategy and believe in its power.
Um, it does require a coordinated vision and approach.
Um, they, we do need dedicated positions
to coordinate this strategy.
Um, given our potential for grant dollars for next year,
we anticipate the local commitment to be $100,000 or less.
Um, again, it's extremely cost effective.
So in voting to become a community school district, you're
absolutely not voting to dedicate any money
or any particular amount of money to that right now.
But open to the idea that it does require board support.
Um, as you've seen, we've had hundreds of thousands
of grant dollars support our, support us so far.
Um, and in order to apply for more grant dollars, we need,
we need to officially, um, have a vote from you.
So, but it does not mean that you're committing any money
before the budget has even been presented,
because that would be backwards.
Next slide. Um, so, uh, like we mentioned earlier,
we have been working with this incredible community group
to launch the South Portland Education Foundation,
whose mission would be to support this strategy.
Um, so they would really lead the way on some philanthropy
and fundraising that could support some of these examples,
including personnel that work, um,
on the community school model, enrichment activities, food
and clothing support, family engagements,
events, and much more.
It wouldn't substitute for the positions that, you know,
the board and the, and the city pay for,
like to run the schools.
But it would really, especially in lean budget times,
be a really huge help to be able to continue the kinds
of family events that we have
where parents don't pay for dinner.
Um, and to pay for, you know, some of the exciting, um,
other activities where kids don't have
to pay if they have any financial barrier
for afterschool programs and things like that.
That's where the foundation could really
come in and support the work.
So here's the question.
Does the school board support the expansion of this model,
uh, to the other schools in South Portland?
And I believe that the actual wording of the motion
is consideration and action for South Portland schools
to become a community school district.
So Leanna
and I are happy to answer any questions
for you at this time.
So are there questions, uh,
through the superintendent for Dr.
Stern, uh,
uh, board member Richardson?
Um, the, can you go back to the slide on the grants,
like the timeline that shows the, the grants please?
I think it's actually, I don't know what number it is, but
It's very in the beginning.
Yeah.
Um, I think it might be slide three, two.
Oh yeah, you have to click a lot.
Yeah, right. That's, there we go. Yeah.
So it, the likelihood that we'll see
a sizable grant, like $664 is pretty low, right?
Unless we have some kind of, god forbid,
an emergency pandemic like situation.
Yeah, there are, there are, there have been federal grants
that have been really sizable.
Um, we haven't been eligible for them
because we aren't a district that has community schools.
Um, and there have been times,
especially in the pandemic when nobody is reporting their
income, um, you have to be more than 40% free
and reduced eligible for food support.
Um, and we were like 39% when the last federal
funding came out.
So there are, there, there is a lot of support
for this model nationally.
Um, but that particular grant was, was very special.
So can we expect, um,
I mean are we just looking at the size of the I'm trying to,
I'm trying to, I'd like, I'd like some kind
of a projection on the grants that we can look forward to,
assuming we support what you're asking us to support.
Mm-hmm. Which, um, you know, is there a way to
kind of quantify that that, is it,
are we just looking at 50,000 a year
or is it can, does that, you know, what is the, so
Currently That $1 equates to seven,
right? You know, so like, right.
Could you, so I, the current grants
that we have on the table,
or could be eligible for, we could be apply for $100,000
for next year and for the year
after from the state of Maine.
Um, we have, the middle school has applied to the State
of Maine grant for the past two years
and gotten it for the past two years.
Um, a new site would get even more points
when they're looking at the grants.
So that would be exciting.
I think what's important, um, is that the work, the,
the amount of work we can do in the district will be related
to the amount of personnel that we can pay for.
But there is a lot of work we have learned
to do at the middle school as sort of an incubator
that we can much more easily expand to other places.
Now, I don't think that we're going
to need seven community school coordinators at
any point, right?
In this, in this district it, we doing a needs
and assets assessment, for example,
which we did in the beginning, took
forever and a lot of work.
And now that we've done it, we kind of know what to do
and are, and Leanna is excited to partner
with the high school to do that work.
And she and Sarah have talked about,
you know, what that might look like.
Um, if the board were to vote on this tonight,
um, a yes vote.
So I think that There is grant money.
I think that the district is going to need
to have some financial skin in the game.
I think that the amount it can do will dictate sort
of the pace at which we can expand.
Um, but I think that having the label
of community school doesn't attach a
specific dollar amount to that.
It just might mean that it's a slower process
or a more narrow process along the way.
Um, but that the, the commitment to partnering
with community, finding those grants,
ha having an education foundation that is a really novel
and exciting approach to, to fundraising.
Um, our community group is extremely excited about having
this type of, um, focus
because it's really is unique from most ED foundations,
which are very whack-a-mole.
You want STEM and you want this
mini grant and you want this.
And there's not a lot of strategy, um,
necessarily involved in those.
And this is a really unique
and exciting thing, um, that they really feel
that funders would be ready and excited to support. So,
So I'd like to just ask the superintendent if you can
explain to us what the ask is for the board tonight,
what your expectation is from the board and what that means.
So I think that's partly what is being asked as well.
Yep. The expectation is that you would, um, approve,
um, moving forward
and advancing, uh,
the community school strategy in the South Portland schools.
And that comes with no, uh, amount
of money that you're committing.
That $100,000 that was mentioned would be, uh, something,
if it were that much or whatever amount of money, uh, was,
uh, to be requested, it would go through the process of, of,
uh, having the board approve it.
So you're not approving that 100,000
that was in the, in the slide.
You're approving only the, uh,
the movement from having one school to moving
to the community school.
And it's not a model, it's the community school strategy.
Are there any other questions? Thank you.
Uh, I'm sorry. Uh, board member Holman? Yes.
Um, I to one is a really trivial question, but,
and then I have one that I hope this last trivial one on
another on a, on a slide somewhere
where we're talking about the results.
Um, like maybe the ones would have the graphs. RIT
Oh, those are, those are the number of points
that students got.
The, the writ scores or the number of
Points, I dunno what your question is.
Member Holman, what does
RIT mean? Oh,
It, it's the points that students got on the, on the test.
They're, they're not related to anything.
It's not a percentage point, it's just
how NWA scores their tests.
I mean, just for my own personal edification,
you don't know what RI do we know what RI stands
For this RT stand. I don't
Know. That's why, who knows?
Lost
Two somewhere.
It's the person who Developed the test rosh unit,
the person who developed the test.
Now I don't feel bad not knowing what that means.
Now they get to go down in history even more. Okay.
And then, um, uh, two, two other things.
Um, one is, what are some examples of the net benefits?
So what are some examples of the net benefits benefits?
Like there's a, oh, why, why is the money come back?
So, yeah, why is it an investment pay off so much more?
Sure. A lot of that is
because of community school coordinators
and their supporting roles can help raise money.
And so part of what Liana does a lot is write grants
and you can see that, that that's really paid off.
And then that grant money can be used
to support scholarships for students.
Um, it can be used to, um, you know, for family events.
We're having a big family event tomorrow night,
which board member Kabisa told us about,
and there'll be food for everybody who arrives.
And so that's really how, um, I believe they calculate that.
Okay. Alright, thanks.
And I guess that answered my,
the final thing was who writes the grants?
Like, because there's gonna be heavy grant
writing going on here. Yep.
So, so currently in our model, um,
Leanna writes the grants and I read them
and say, this looks great.
Um, if, uh, with the can more invent of the foundation,
I think that could really be much more of a partnership.
Um, because, you know, a lot
of Leanna's time is also spent doing the actual work
of working with community
and building community, bringing, you know, family
and student voice into the work
that we're doing and things like that. Thank
You. Oh,
Yes. Um,
I, I think the other place
where when you talk about the cost, cost benefit is, um, a,
as I talked about with kind of this ripple effect, uh,
of some of the, the programming
and partnerships that we put into place.
The idea is that they're also kind of,
they're reducing special ed costs.
They're reducing the, the, the number of interventions
that we might need for students.
So you're, you're reducing risk for students
that might end up costing the district money in the future.
So I just wanna add that too.
Thank you. Any other questions? Uh, member Rich?
Yeah. The short time I've been on the board,
I've heard a lot of parents say they we're interested in
helping our kids, but we don't have any way to do that.
Is this gonna be a way that maybe a parent from particular
school or a group of parents could collaborate
with the foundation?
Yes. Okay.
I'm sorry. Uh, member Richardson.
Um, the, do we think that the kind
of shift towards a community school strategy does away
with the need for a community engagement coordinator?
'cause we had those roles.
I, I actually don't think that role has been filled.
Correct. So, yeah.
Um, I, I think that this would be a revamp of that. Yeah.
And I, and I don't actually wanna answer
for the superintendent or assistant superintendent,
but that I, this is that work. Let's
Ask that question to him Strategic way. Let's
Ask them the question.
Is superintendent and Wes, whether the,
the community engagement coordinator,
which position hasn't been filled, is, is, uh,
supplemented by this
or would would not exist because of this?
I think, um, I think
that's certainly under serious consideration at this point.
Thank you. Anyway else, um,
are the slides completed? Yes.
Okay. Um, member Holman.
Um, so look, looking at, for example, if we, we, uh,
adopt the community school model at the high school,
how much, like is this basically,
and, uh, it's, I don't, it's fine if it is,
but I just wanna understand, is this kind of an overlay
or does this reach into other systems?
So for example, uh, like, I don't know,
guidance, you know, school counselors, you know, um,
like are there ways, like, is I just wonder like is
that an overlay or is there some other
way these things may transform together?
Uh, I would say the, at the middle school,
it's been the, the latter.
Um, we have really partnered
with a lot of community partners.
The high school has a, a lot of supports, um, already
that exist here with community partnerships.
Um, I think what's been nice about having this model is,
is Leanna's been able to coordinate between, in a way
that most full-time staff don't have the capacity
to do at the moment in a school.
Um, but we have a system for when a student needs,
uh, mental health support.
You know, we have three different community partners plus
our school-based services.
And so we now have a system for talking
and looking at how can we best meet that student's need, um,
in an efficient way.
So examples like that I think are really good ways that a,
the, the strategy itself leverages the time
and the expertise of the people, um, with help.
Um, because we can't, you know, schools are,
are maxed in a lot of ways.
And so having the support
of the community school director is really,
is really key to that.
Thanks. Thank you.
So you, no further questions. Thank you very much, Dr.
Thank you.
So next up on the superintendent's report is, uh,
themes from the budget, uh, forums.
Uh, we had budget forums, uh, last week,
um, one virtual one in person
and, uh, Joe Prince, Dr. Prince is going to, um,
uh, share those with us.
Sure. Uh, if you would go ahead
and move forward to the next slide.
Um, so we are
actually beginning month four
of the FY 27 budget development.
I think it's important to note
that we have begun this process back in November,
more information in December and January.
Um, and again, I know it gets most busy
for the budget season in March.
Um, but the conversations that we hosted last week, I think,
uh, we had very universal positive feedback from, uh,
over two nights Wednesday and Thursday night.
We had about a hundred participants join
between both nights.
Uh, the photo down at the right is from Wednesday night.
We are up at the middle school
and you can see, uh, that folks from around the community
representing a variety of roles were at tables.
After there was information presented,
then there was sharing, and those notes were all collected.
We, uh, modeled the same thing in a virtual setting on
Thursday night and were gathered in digital breakout rooms,
um, that evening.
Um, and I think what is overwhelming to,
to both be present in those conversations
and to read the notes is just the amazing value
that South Portland residents place on education.
Um, I feel really fortunate to hear that again
and again in these community events.
Um, and that stakeholders are grappling
with the challenges ahead.
Uh, the complexity of declining enrollment rise in costs
and ensuring that we are being strong fiscal stewards.
Uh, across the conversations on both nights,
it was really clear that the folks who came out to share
with us wanna make sure that student needs are at the center
of all the decisions we make.
Um, wow, that's really scary. What, why, what's happening?
Great. We shoulda
Party, party again.
Probably should have been bad bunny though.
Yeah.
Great. Um, thanks for that, uh, making
Sure everyone's paying attention to it. That
Is excellent. Um,
and also I think it was very clear in the conversations
and the notes how much relationships matter in this
community and both the sense of staff
and student belonging, uh, is critical to the folks
who came out to share with us.
Um, if you would go ahead onto the next slide.
Um, so the input that was
provided on opportunities
and concerns there, there is a lot
of differing opinions on specific solutions.
Um, but across that, again, participants really shared
students as the fi first priority, a commitment
to equity and diversity.
The goal that we need
to work towards long-term financial sustainability.
Uh, folks shared their appreciation for the dialogue
and opportunity in the forum, their desire for transparency
and community input throughout the budget process.
Um, and a goal of protecting what makes our schools strong.
So we, um, that evening we shared with folks, uh,
a system for collecting continued questions from the public
up on our website, folks are able to submit questions
around additional data requests.
I can share that just in the time since we've opened
that we're now up to 51 requests for data
with regards to information that folks want.
Um, and while we, we may not be able to produce all of it,
I think it speaks volumes for the way
that this community wants
to feel like they understand the challenge, uh,
and can be part of the brainstorming.
So we will, we will work on prioritizing those topics
that are coming up most frequently to get
that information back out.
Any questions on the budget?
Any questions for Dr. Prince? Uh, member Holman?
So 51 is a lot of requests for data.
I'm gonna assume that's kind of a,
there's kind some overlap there, so they're not like,
because it seems like at certain point
that could become unmanageable or
I think we may have reached the unmanageable point,
but yes, there is some overlap.
I do think, uh, for good reason the majority
of the questions are
around a potential elementary school reconfiguration.
I think if the board moves forward requesting that proposal,
that will give us the opportunity
to present a lot of that data.
How many classrooms, what's enrollment?
Like all of those things that would factor into that.
Um, so there are themes we may not be able to get
to every question, but I hopefully we
can address all the themes.
Thank you. Other
questions? Great.
I think I am, next up you're
Also next up again, uh, Dr. Prince.
Uh, pre-K. So
If we could just do a 360 turnaround
and then come back to the parties.
I already danced once tonight. Rosemary.
Um, I think, uh, yeah,
Uh, and, and this is, uh, updates in terms
of pre-K and CDS.
And if you wouldn't mind advancing
to the next slide again.
Um, so wanted to share with the board
and the community that our lottery is open
for next school year.
Uh, remember we are not
yet at universal pre-K offerings in South Portland.
So we do use a lottery system new this year
in part because of bullet two.
Uh, we will be asking for all children
to participate in the screening process.
Screening is an opportunity for the child
and the family to come into school.
The teachers and staff welcome the child, uh,
it feels like a play experience for the child.
They are there with, uh, a few other kids at the same time
for us to get to know them better, um,
and learn a little bit more about them so
that we can think about creating balanced classrooms
and referring children if there are needs, um,
that we observe during those experiences.
Um, so this year, in order
to be eligible for the lottery, families do need
to have completed the form by March 6th.
Later in March is when we anticipate those
screening appointments.
And then early April is when we, uh, expect to announce,
uh, the lottery system of who has a space for next year.
I can report that as of today,
61 people have already filled out that lottery form.
Typically we are around a hundred by the time we have
that first deadline, so we seem to be right on track with
that, but appreciate everyone sharing that this is open, um,
for children who will be four next year.
In addition, uh, south Portland has moved forward
to join cohort three of the child development services
or CDS transition.
That means that effective July 1st,
we will be taking on responsibilities for four year olds
in our catchment area
and the provision of special education services.
It does not mean that we must provide programming all day
for students, but that we are coordinating services
that does come with new fiscal dollars
that begin in July.
We also will be requesting pre-award dollars this spring so
that we can begin to ramp up for this transition
because it does take additional, uh, investments
and personnel to coordinate this transition.
Just so folks in the audience
and on the board are aware is required,
next year is cohort four.
Everyone has to have joined by cohort four.
We made the decision that starting with four year olds
for next year made the most sense
and then next year we will have to also take on, uh,
the provision of services for three year olds.
Finally wanted to update the board on partnerships.
Uh, we believe that pre-K is a space
where families should have choice on the ways
that their family accesses pre-kindergarten.
Um, the public schools are not the only way that
that can happen this year.
You may recall we have a partnership with chite, uh,
where we have up to 16 seats available
for South Portland residents.
As of the end of last month, 15
of those slots were South Portland.
We are passing through dollars from the state to pre-K
for that public pre-K program.
It is revenue neutral, uh,
and cost neutral for the district
to provide that partnership.
And again, is a great opportunity for families
who need wraparound care, um, before and after care.
They pay privately for those services,
but the hours that are considered public pre-K are
free to the families.
We are an expansion talks for more partnerships with United
for Childcare, which is a arm of the United Way.
Um, and we are excited about the potential for,
for funding for more seats there.
And then we also have been approached by Headstart
to consider an in kind donation of a classroom space
that could function as a Headstart classroom.
The staff would be paid for and hired by Headstart,
but it would operate from inside one of our buildings.
Uh, it's an incredible win-win
for our community if we are able to make this work, um,
because again, headstart really operates under
that similar community school strategy of partnership, um,
and we believe it would be a real benefit to our families.
So happy to answer any questions about pre-K.
Thank you questions. Um, member Richardson.
Um, is there a world
where we would consider pre-K to align
with the school with the K through five day?
Um, because you know,
you're talking about the wraparound care
that Chickadee can provide and,
but that's only for 16 residents, you know, um,
or pre-K kiddos.
So I, I'm, yeah,
Sure. I think,
uh, it, it is certainly a conversation that we, uh,
we can have, I think important for the board
and the community to be aware that the supervision
requirements and ratios
for pre-K are different than our other grades.
So the, the district that I came for, for instance,
they had full day pre-K programming.
However, on Mondays there was no pre-K
because of the prep time
and the planning time for the teachers and staff.
Because with 4-year-old students,
the staff are always with them.
Um, they eat lunch in a different way.
Um, there's different contractual pieces that we need
to look at, but again, there,
there are ways to solve for that.
It's just not quite as simple as saying mm-hmm.
Suddenly the day will become six hours
instead of five hours.
Um, member Fowler,
Uh, I have two questions.
The first question is, you know, kind of take this to,
you know, two or three years out,
how many children are we providing, um, services to
that we wouldn't be providing today?
That's the first question. And the second question is,
are other school districts pursuing
waivers, uh, for any of this?
You know, given our budget situation, you could
reasonably expect that we would be granted a waiver to,
to not, um, move forward with this program.
Sure. Great questions.
Um, in terms of where, where I predict we'll be
for next year, if all of these partnerships work out
as planned, I would guess if we don't expand past our four
local classrooms, that we'd probably be in the neighborhood
of meeting 75% of need.
If the district were
to consider adding a fifth classroom next year,
that obviously does go up.
Um, so you can sort of map that out
and know that we are, we are getting closer to the goal
of making sure that families have an available pre-K again,
a family, it's not compulsory, so a family does not have
to choose to send their child,
but we know the benefits of that early investment.
So hopefully that answers kind of part one of your question.
Part two, with regards to a waiver
for the CDSI,
I am unsure of a waiver process.
I have not heard of anyone being granted a waiver.
I will say that for South Portland,
it actually feels like a financial win to be in cohort three
because we will,
we will be getting additional dollars
that we would not have if we waited.
Those additional dollars can go to support our,
our local programming that already exists as well.
So again, I think it's actually, um, to our benefit
to be entering right now so
that we have an additional revenue stream coming in
that we would not have otherwise.
Thanks.
Thank you. Other questions? Um, member Holman,
I just like a little more clarity on
what the cohort system is.
Sure. So the main Department of Education has tried
to group districts into, uh, cohorts.
And that is just, I think,
to provide efficient information to us.
So they'll send out an announcement that says Cohort three,
these are your upcoming timelines.
They have, um, both, uh, director Kat Cox
and I have been on calls where they sort of group you
for professional development information sessions.
So it's more of an organizational structure, uh,
to provide professional development.
And it allows us to identify districts
that have a similar profile that are in cohort one
and two to be able to call them
and also say what have you learned
and sort of identify
where in the transition process folks are.
Great question.
Thank you. I I have a couple questions, uh,
if I can Dr. Prince first is, um,
you said we're at 61 now
and we're usually at a hundred at the end
and we usually meet 75% of the need if we stay
with, with our four.
So my first question is,
does do our four classrooms include the chickadee
or is is that another one?
That is, it is considered one of our classrooms,
but I, when I'm saying we have 64 seats
within South Portland schools.
That was my next question this year. Very good.
Six. So we have 64 seats.
And what percentage of those do we fill with, I I,
I know in our lottery there's a way that people
who are economically disadvantaged, uh,
or challenged get a a certain percentage of
that 64. What is that percent?
Correct. So we have a commitment to 60% of the seats
that we award are for families that identify
as having special education services
or being from a, uh, disadvantaged, uh,
background as measured by their income.
Okay. So in addition, I would just add we work
to mirror the multilingual population in our pre-K, so
that if 20% of our students K 12
are multilingual, then we would be looking to ensure
that our pre-K had at least 20%
multilingual as well. Gotcha.
Okay. And the 64 seats does not include the,
then there's 16 additional from Chickadee
Correct. Up
to 16 right now, only 15 of those are filled
with South Portland residents. Okay.
And are those 16 counted in the 60% award
or do we not have any control?
No, we have a memorandum of understanding with Chickie and
whenever we develop our partnership,
it would be its own memorandum of understanding where
they do not have to use the same lottery rules
that the district uses.
They simply have to have a system in place
whereby if they have too many students, they have a process
that they can um, use.
Okay, thank you. And my last question
is about the head start.
Uh, is that something that there has to be board approval
or what, what is the process for us
to get into the Head Start partnership.
Uh, I believe that does formally need board approval
as a partnership.
Um, so I would hope to be bringing that information back
to the board in, in March.
Um, for your consideration, again, from,
from everything we know statewide about
how this partnership works, it is, um,
it absolutely represents the kind of, um,
partnership model that we would hope for.
Thank you. Thank you. Any other questions? Okay.
Seeing none. Um,
Sorry, can I, I, can I ask a question?
Yes. Sorry. Um, member, uh, Richardson, um, I,
So Chair DeAngelo's questions prompted me
to que I guess I don't understand the Chicky relationship.
And are those, I mean, I heard you say what, you know,
dollars, it's sort of a net neutral experience for us.
We're just, it's, is it a referral system? Like,
So, uh, basically we ask, we act as the fiscal agent,
the Department of Education can't fund the dollars directly
to, uh, a childcare center,
but they can fund dollars to us for a program
that is a public pre-K program.
So the dollars come to us.
We've reported those students,
and again, we use the per pupil figure for pre-K
on our D 2 79,
and we passed that dollar figure through to the partner.
And are those 15 slots that are spoken for right now,
did they apply to the district
through the public pre-K program So that, you know, 15
of them kind of went over here to Chickity
and we ol, you know, we handled the 60, you know, the 60,
and then there was 64.
Sure. So they first, uh,
because they have longstanding relationships
with their families, you know,
children could start there at six weeks old.
Uh, there was first an option for anyone
who had been in their existing school Yeah.
To have access to the seat when they've had an opening.
They are in touch with us for a referral as you use
that word to fill that open seat.
Okay. Thank you. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Any other comments? Okay.
Thank you. So, go
Ahead. Uh, so next
on the agenda, it says, uh, that, uh,
Joe is going to do the audit,
but actually that's, we've moved that.
It's gonna be under the budget update,
and that's gonna be presented by Abigail.
Um, so we'll move to, uh, it's Mike Nally, uh, director
of Safety and Operations, I think was asked by the board,
uh, to give an update on the athletic complex.
Uh, we have Todd Livingston, um, here as well,
who may actually, um, also have, uh, something
to contribute in terms of the, um, the, the update itself.
So the, I'll introduce the two gentlemen
and whoever wants to start can start. Great.
Good evening everybody. Mike
Nally, director of Operations and Safety.
I'm actually gonna pass this off to,
uh, director Livingston.
He's been a little bit closer to the action
and has more details.
I'll be up here with him to answer any, uh,
amplifying questions, but I'll let Todd give you
the brief. Thank you.
Perfect. Good evening.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to be here.
Um, alright, there's the slide.
Um, so, uh, Mike and Harold
and I actually had a meeting this morning with,
with Ben Gleason from Activa.
So, um, we have a little bit of updated information.
Um, so in terms of the project scope, as you know, um,
the referendum approved, um, uh,
work being done at the stadium to include, uh,
a new eight lane track, uh, a new athletic field
that will be natural grass, uh, new lights, um, and a
and permanent restrooms.
Um, to, to provide a, just a few more specifics.
The track will be an eight lane track.
Um, the jump areas, uh, that are currently outside
of the field, um, will be moved into what's called the ds,
which is the circle circular end at the end of each field.
Uh, the pole vault, uh, the existing will be displaced due
to, uh, when you have an eight lane track, it's wider.
Um, so it's gonna push into the current pole vault space.
Uh, a relocated shot put, which is currently in one
of the ds, uh, will be located out near the,
the pole vault runway, um, and landing areas.
Um, it's actually gonna be a double shot put.
Um, so for practices, uh,
we can have a lot more throwers participating
and practicing at the same time.
Um, obviously the new lights will be
much more energy efficient.
And then the restroom building will include, uh,
in five female toilets.
Um, three male toilets with two urinals, um,
and then two unisex bathrooms, uh, in that new building, uh,
funding costs as, uh, the school board is likely aware,
the referendum approved the, uh,
4 million six hundred and sixty, sixty six hundred $60,
um, for the project.
Um, and as Ben shared with us this morning, um,
they used the, they were escalated costs in there for, um,
depending on what year the, the work actually happened.
Um, so there was a 4% escalated cost, uh, included in that
for the project starting in 2027.
Uh, I think the biggest piece of news
to share is the timeline, um, which we,
we learned a great deal this morning.
Um, so, uh, a contract from Activa was submitted.
Um, Abigail has been part of this process with us as well.
Um, we had it reviewed, um, by, by legal counsel, um,
with some edits sent back to Activa, uh,
to which they've agreed to.
And so that contract should be signed
with Activa, um, shortly.
Um, so in April, 2026, um,
pending weather conditions, uh, they will do a survey
of the current facility, uh, subsurface, geotechnical
investigations, and, uh, an electrical survey as well.
Um, the schematic design, um,
which should take about six weeks, uh, will occur from March
to April of 2026.
Uh, design will take eight to 10 weeks with
that work being completed from April to June of 2026.
Uh, permitting will start in July of 2026.
Uh, Ben mentioned reaching out to the city of South Port
to see if the, their,
the South port Planning Board would like to have a meeting
with, uh, activa.
And, um, and the group working on the, on the project.
Um, Mike can jump in if I don't capture this accurately,
but we are bordering on
one acre impervious surface area.
Um, and depending on
what the state determines we are, uh, actually, um,
how many acres we actually are, um,
that could determine the permitting process with the state.
And so this is kind of a key thing.
If it's less than one acre,
permitting would only take roughly two weeks.
Uh, if it's more than one acre, it could take up
to 230 days.
Um, which would, which would obviously impact the,
the finishing of the project.
Um, potentially, uh,
push it out a month through a month and a half.
Um, contractual and,
and bid documents would go out in December of 2026.
Um, these documents, um, can,
can be worked on depending upon the length, length, how,
how long the permitting, um, takes place.
And then construction.
Um, we would use the field in the fall of, um, 26
and, um, weather permitting.
They would start working on construction in April of 2027.
Uh, right now, um, in their documents, their,
their goal would be completion, hopefully by September 1st,
um, which would be kind of timing with the start
of the fall, regular season.
Um, and again, if that, if
that permanent permitting process ends up taking the 230
days, uh, it could push out, uh,
us getting the field back into mid to late September,
maybe even early October.
Um, so it, so,
Okay. Are there any
questions for Mr. Livingston?
No. Member Richardson. No, it was just, I can apologize.
Member feller was hesitating, like whether he was gonna ask
or not, so I was looking at him. Go ahead. Um,
You mentioned the escalator costs.
What can you walk, walk us through that, I mean, what
that means from, in terms
of the timeline you just presented.
You could chime in if you want, or Abigail,
but I, I think if I remember correctly, the, um,
the information that, the financial information
that Aita had shared, um,
because this conversation has been
ongoing for a period of time.
Yep. Um, in that final document, they had Inc
because it was dependent upon a referendum, um, in passing.
So they had included some escalating costs, I think even out
to 2028, I think, just so that we had what that looked like,
um, for our information, I believe.
Does that make sense?
Is that transparent? Is that accessible to,
I believe all those documents?
I think there's still a link on the district website Yeah.
Um, that had all the information, uh,
about the project and the referendum.
Um, I mean, I guess my, like the gist
of my question is are we looking at a project cost
that exceeds the ref, the referendum? No. Okay.
Thank you. We can't mm-hmm. I, I didn't think
About, yeah.
Uh, member Holman.
So if I, if to, I'm kind of piggybacking on that.
So in other words, that 4% is an estimated inflation cost?
Correct. Okay. So, uh,
it's not fixed, right?
'cause it's estimated. So if, if, could
that go in different directions?
Could it end up being less or more? I mean,
ISI suppose it could, I also think, um,
and Mike can correct me if I'm wrong,
but I think there's also contingency built into, into the,
um, into the dollar amount as well.
Which means cut
for cost overruns, you mean? Or what is that? Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Okay. Any other questions?
Seeing none, thank you. Okay. Thank you. Uh, and Mr.
Ally, before you leave, uh,
because board member Dowling is not here,
is there anything about, uh, boundaries
and configurations report that you need to share with us?
And I don't mean to put you on the spot,
but I am putting you on the spot,
but if there's, if there's, if there's nothing,
that's fine, but just,
I think you mean, um, I mean, I'm sorry,
I didn't mean boundaries and configurations.
I'm like, I, I'd be happy to share about that.
I meant buildings and grounds. Yeah. Geez.
Um, My head, yes.
No, I don't think, I don't think there's anything, um,
newsworthy for this group right now.
Okay. Thanks. I'll certainly share
that back through him and he can
Thank you. And he
included minutes in here, so there,
the board can look at those.
His minutes are accurate. I look at him yesterday, but,
Uh, but if there's no other,
nothing else you needed to add, that's great.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. We're getting close here.
Um, The, uh,
thanks Mike and,
and Todd appreciate that, uh, the enrollment report.
Um, board member Richardson will be happy to see,
uh, this next slide.
Um, there has been an increase of 12 students, um,
since January of 2026.
And you'll get to see the trajectory, um,
here in the exact number of students.
So it's an interesting, uh, place where we started, uh, kind
of swooped down and, and sort of, um, and, and building up.
And we'll see, uh, what happens in, in these next months.
Um, the, as I said, the budget, uh, review is going
to budget.
Update is going to come under the, uh, report of committees.
And, um, but first we have public comment. Yes.
Thank you. A public comment portion
of the agenda is an opportunity for the board to listen
to opinions of the public that relate to school
and educational matters on or off this evening's agenda.
The board is here to listen.
Anyone wishing to speak will be asked to proceed
to the microphone and just give your name and the town
or city where you live.
You'll be given three minutes to speak.
Is there anyone who would like to, as a reminder, uh,
school board meetings or broadcast live?
We just ask that there be no clapping or booing
or other disruptive behavior.
Um, and just please consider the impact
of your comments on or off the agenda.
It's all yours. No one wants to talk.
Yes, you do. J Sarah
Round two Round.
Round two. You okay. Um, okay.
So, uh, we are up to, so public comment is closed.
Uh, we are up to the report of committees,
so the report of the finance committee.
Okay. Um, so, uh, um,
we met Abigail, you're gonna come up, right?
But just to give a, give an overview where, uh, I, we,
we had our finance committee meeting on the sixth
and, um, spent it looking over the document that, um,
Abigail Kitchen, our, our wonderful finance
director had prepared for us.
Some other things have come in
to help us understand things better, in particular numbers
around nutrition, and she'll be
explaining that in more detail.
But I would say that I continue to be very grateful
that we have someone who's willing to hang in there with us
till we get this, all this ship turned
around onward.
Okay. Hello everyone.
I'm Abigail Chen, director of finance.
Um, so I've got three distinct, um,
items to share.
Um, and I'm happy to take questions in between each of them.
Um, so I wanna talk about, um, where we are
for our budget this fiscal year,
and then I want to talk about the audit from FY
25 last year.
And then, um, we have an update to one
of our benefit programs that I wanted to talk about as well.
Um, so I'm gonna start with
where we are at this fiscal year.
Um, okay.
So about 58% of the year has passed.
Um, we've had, we have, we have most of our funds expended,
um, or encumbered.
The encumbered piece means, um, the bulk of that is payroll,
so we encumber payroll, right?
Um, so everybody's payroll through the end
of this fiscal year is included in our projections.
Um, so in the last few months, we've had this kind
of footnote out there about the nutrition fund.
Um, it is a separate fund from the school fund.
Um, it's a fund that has had its own fund balance,
which is also depleted.
Um, it is a fund that is budgeted separately.
It is a reimbursement fund.
Um, it is meant to be, um, re funds are expended,
and then we get reimbursements from the state of Maine.
Um, and there will be questions about that I'm happy
to answer as well.
Um, so in FY 25, um,
the nutrition fund deficit was about 715,000.
Um, it was also budgeted to be in deficit.
It was put in, like the budget
for it was put in at about 573,000 deficit.
Then we went a little bit more than that.
Um, this year in FY 26, the budget that was developed, um,
had about a $464,000 deficit, um,
which must be covered by the school.
Um, the school transfer that we budgeted was 202,000.
Um, so we have a mismatch, um, already there.
Um, like I said, nutrition fund, it's been this footnote.
Um, but now in this new projection, um, the big update is
that we even, we, I'm now including, um,
the projected deficit for this year in all three scenarios.
Um, so whereas last month we had, you know, scenario A, B,
and C, the a being, the rosier one,
we had a possible surplus.
Um, at this point, all scenarios, um, end in deficit.
Um, but that's not because nutrition has inherently changed.
I think it's been on a trajectory
of deficit for quite some time.
We're just more like, we're more aware of it now.
We've surfaced it. Um, so now we're able to share the data.
Um, and the effect on the data is that kinda all roads lead
to, to deficit at this point.
Um, I think the degree
of the deficit still matters.
Um, we should continue to tighten our belts.
Um, the, the non personnel spending freeze continues.
It must, um, leadership, we are, you know, evaluating
what further curtailment we can take.
Um, we certainly must take further curtailments.
Um, the, when I say the degree of deficit matters,
it matters because we will ultimately still
have to pay it back.
Um, our deficit, um, without a fund balance,
without our own balance, um, draws from the city's, um,
fund balance and paying that back as part
of maintaining our credit rating with the city.
So it is imperative that, you know, everything
that we've spent, we ultimately pay for.
Um, so that's the main update for this fiscal year.
Um, I'm happy to take questions.
Are there questions about the, um, nutrition fund balance?
Yes. Yes. A member Richardson.
Thank you. Um, first question is,
what, what is the exact per pupil amount
that we get from the state for nutrition?
And how are we, how much are we exceeding that in our, like,
you know, 'cause I, you know, I know, I know
that whatever we're getting isn't enough,
or based on whatever criteria we've established,
but how much is it not enough?
Um, and then
Why don't we get that answer first?
Okay. Do you have an answer to that?
Yes, yes. Oh, great. Okay. Okay. Thank you. Um, yeah.
So the way the nutrition fund works, we put in claims
for numbers of meals,
and then the state of Maine has a set amount per
meal for lunches.
We get $4 and 69 cents reimbursed
for each lunch that we provide.
For each breakfast we provide.
We get $2 46 cents
or 2 94 if it's, uh, for a higher needs student.
So we put our claim, we put our numbers in in this,
in the claim system, you know, four,
$4 69 cents times the number of lunches.
That's what we'll get back. Um, how much are we over?
I mean, we're over to the tune of 1.1 million for this year,
is what, is what we're projecting?
I, I, I think Abigail, the, I think the question was
how much do, how much do we spend per student? Was that
On top of, right on top? So,
So we're, we're allotted $4 and 69 cents.
Mm-hmm. And what's the, what's the cost
that we actually spend?
Like, do we spend $5
and 69 cents, so we're over a dollar each child, or,
Um, that's something I can get back to you on. Okay.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Thank mm-hmm.
Um, and
is, is there a reason why the nutrition bus budget sits
outside of our budget of the school budget?
You know, what, what's the rationale behind that?
And are we, are we thinking that maybe
that's not such a great idea?
And how do we keep better eyes on it within the realm of
the, you know, the entire budget?
Yeah, I mean, the, the, the program
for nutrition is funded ultimately by federal dollars.
Um, so that's part of keeping that separate as part
of general accounting.
Um, if we get a federal grant, it gets its own fund.
It's kept separate.
But in terms of when we're looking at the breakdown
of the cost centers of our budget mm-hmm.
We are having to pick up the tab.
That's right. So there has to be a way
in the world of accounting that, that,
that bridges that gap.
Because otherwise, you know,
otherwise the nutrition director
director needs their own finance
director. Right. I, I don't,
No, I it is just a matter of attending to it
and keeping track of it.
So how do we, how do we plan on doing, how do
We intend, um, I'm doing that now.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that, that's part of
what this role should be doing is, is attending to it,
keeping track of it, keeping in mind
that their deficit is covered by the school fund.
I think that's been lost in translation over a few years.
Okay. Well, thank you for doing that. Yeah.
And just my last question. Mm-hmm.
And I just don't know if we have an answer for this,
and this might be for George,
but, um, is there a world where families can opt in
to pay towards school lunch?
Um, understanding that the state mandates that
lunches be provided at no cost to all students.
Um, are you aware
of any districts that have tried to do that?
Is that just totally taboo and off the table?
Okay, I'm gonna pass that question to the superintendent.
Um, you have an answer,
Abigail? Yeah.
I was chatting with the nutrition director about this
one, and, um, I understand it is a legally
mandated free mm-hmm.
Service. We are, we are to provide this
for free to students,
But, so maybe,
Which I think you can still do, um,
but it's, it's, it's a voluntary opt-in to, to fund,
you know, and to, to, to go towards,
I mean, we're receiving ion federal dollars for this.
I wouldn't think we can accept payment
in exchange for services.
A parent can donate to the Future Foundation. Mm-hmm.
Things like that, of course. But, um, no
Question. Board member Holman.
So, so maybe it could be something
where, uh, it was, I'm kind of responding
to Lenny Richardson.
Maybe it could be something where, uh,
although we didn't go, it wasn't,
it wasn't paid at the lunch line we had,
there was people understood that this amount,
if you were able to donate this amount,
it would cover your kids' lunches
and it could go into, it could go into the foundation.
Yeah. I don't know. I don't know either.
We, we cannot charge for student lunch. Correct.
Once we're receiving federal dollars.
We cannot, we cannot supplement that in any way.
And so if somebody wanted to make a donation
to the foundation, they can,
but we can't allocate that money
and say, that's going to be used
to supplement the free lunch program
because we have a mandate by federal government
that we will provide free lunch to all students.
We cannot accept any money in, in exchange
for payment of that.
Say that, Vince, Any other
Questions? Any other questions about
this fiscal year?
Okay. You can keep going, Abigail.
Okay. Okay. So now I'm gonna talk a little bit about our
FY 25 audit.
Um, we did have a couple issues cleared.
Um, so that is the good news.
Um, what I'm paying most attention to is
what we need to do moving forward.
Um, we do have, um, one material finding, um,
from FY 25 related to our reconciliation procedures.
Um, I think the overall mandate is to,
you know, properly reconcile, um, sp um,
the specific accounts, the benefits accounts,
withholding accounts, and grants receivables.
Um, so that is going to be a, a major focus, um,
moving forward, um, through this fiscal year for sure.
And into the next one. Um,
the next one is a significant deficiency
with allowable federal costs.
Um, this one, I would say is going to be
pr is going to be taken care of.
This was a, a very distinct payment from the f from FFY 23
that needed to have been fully addressed.
It came up in the FY 24 audit.
Um, there's some money we were
to pay back an FY 25, we didn't.
Um, and we will certainly make that payment
and ensure that we're all set moving forward.
Um, but that also speaks to the reconciliation, um,
procedures and the material weakness.
So if, you know, reconciling grant receivables would've,
you know, prevent number one would've prevented number
two, basically.
Um, then we've got budgetary non-compliance.
Um, we all know about that one.
Um, we, we, we overspent last year.
Um, then we have two other comments, uh,
for payroll procedures.
That one was related to time cards.
Um, I feel confident we can address
that one relatively quickly, um, this year.
And then with journal approvals, um, that was a lack
of supervisory approvals, um,
that one we have effectively fixed.
Um, we have a new workflow in our financial software system
that allows for a supervisor to approve, um, when that, when
that happens, it's documented electronically.
And that was the key piece to that comment.
Um, I think the context in moving forward is,
is really matters here.
Um, especially the context.
Um, I am the seventh, um, business manager
for the school in six years.
Um, and what, what that means is,
is is not just deterioration of what my role would perform,
that's a team of people.
Actually, that means there's, you know, people
who have been newly hired
and onboarded, um, without the, the training
of somebody who's been in the position year after year.
Um, I think the stability also matters a lot
with budgetary compliance.
Um, I, I, I, I think there is a difference building a budget
that you know you're gonna live through, um, that,
that does add a level of attention, um, to things.
Um, you know, I think policies and procedures over time.
I mean, imagine yourself as a team member.
You've had six, seven bosses.
They come, they go, um, you know, so procedures sort
of become a little more unwieldy.
Things deteriorate, um, and, and training and,
and all of that sort of can go by the wayside.
Um, I do feel confident that with stability we can, um,
face our challenges.
Um, I think a key focus on reconciliation, training,
upskilling, performance management, all of that, uh,
will make a big difference.
Um, I, I can't highlight enough
that this is a multi-year effort, right?
It took many years to get to the point
where we have these kinds of audit findings,
and it's gonna take a few years to really sort things out
and get our financial house in order.
Um, so I would just say, you know, it's,
it's not gonna be a clean slate out,
a clean slate from here on out,
but I think it will be cleaner.
Um, and I would think that the FY 27 audit, um,
should look pretty good.
Um, but it, it will take time to get there.
We'll take that as your 10 year commitment to
Questions on the audit.
Any questions about the audit?
Seeing none. Okay.
You want to go on to the paid Family Medical Leave Act?
Okay. Um, my final item tonight, um, is to talk about
paid family medical leave.
Um, so this paid, paid family medical leave, um,
we are currently, uh, we pay 1% of all salaries, um,
into the state of Maine.
Um, this is not a program that anybody is, um,
kinda taking advantage of yet.
Um, really everybody is paying into it.
Um, it should become effective as of May 1st, 2026.
That's when people will be eligible to, you know, apply
to receive a benefit to receive some pay while they take,
uh, their family medical leave.
Um, so again, we're currently, we're all paying 1%.
Um, we share that with employees.
So employees pay put in 0.5%.
We the employer put in 5%.
Um, employers are not bound
to participate in the state of Maine plan.
They can move to a private plan with state approval.
Um, and what I'm here to share tonight is that the city
of South Portland has shopped around, um,
for some cheaper options,
and they found, uh, what I think is a good deal for us.
Um, so the gist
of this is we could pay 0.95% instead of 1%.
Um, so it'll be a little bit cheaper that's still split
between the employer and employees.
Um, so it'll be a little bit less, um,
it would be effective May 1st.
And because we're all paying into the state of Maine,
that 1% we're all paying
to then receive a benefit as of May.
This private option is like an insurance.
So we pay premiums, um, but we wouldn't have to pay into it
before we get coverage, right?
Like health insurance, you start paying your premiums when
you really start to get the benefits from it.
Um, so because we wouldn't have to continue
to build into the state of Maines plan, we could recoup, um,
January 1st through April 30th.
Um, which means that if everything goes as we may hope, um,
we could give January's contributions back to the employees,
our part, back to the employer.
Um, and then we would be able to not have
to withhold from employees, um, until, uh, May 1st.
Um, so that gives everybody a little bit of money back, um,
which is a big bonus for everyone.
Um, as part of going with this private option, um,
we would have to offer, um, some other voluntary, um,
insurance options.
It would be at no cost to us,
but it would be an optional, you know, there's like
accidental death and dismemberment
and a couple others, um, that we may be able to offer
to employees on a voluntary basis.
Um, and, uh, there's no minimum participation requirement.
It would just be something else that we would offer.
Um, we did get some savings estimates by cross insurance.
Um, we're estimating that four months
of 1% was about 145,000 split, 50 50
to the employers back to us, um,
and an annual savings of around 20,000.
Um, so that is what we are moving forward with the city.
Um, so at, after this point, the city will be moving, um,
to towards discussion with City Council.
Um, and if that's approved, then it would, um, be then we,
an application would be submitted with the state of Maine,
and that application is when we would have a chance
of recouping some of the, the costs.
Um, and that's if everything goes well.
If it doesn't, then I'll share that update as well. Um, but
Thank you. Any questions
about the, um, paid Family Medical Leave Act?
Seeing none? Go ahead. Abigail, do you have anything else?
That is it. Okay. That is it. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Appreciate it.
Uh, we are at the, um, policy committee report,
and, uh, that's me.
So the minutes are attached to the, uh,
that were approved at the last meeting,
and are attached to the, uh, slides
that you received in your packet.
There are two first reads,
and I know that we did the public
participation at board meetings.
First read, however, uh, thank you to, uh,
president Sergay from, uh, the teachers Union pointing out
that it was the wrong attachment that was provided for you.
So we have the correct attachment that was included.
And so we will go back
to doing a first read voting on a first read of that public
participation, which is policy BEDH,
and then policy BCA, uh, with,
um, an exhibit.
The rules of decorum is to go with the pc.
Uh, BCA is the ethics policy that was passed by the, uh,
by the policy committee.
And we did the first and second read of that.
And we're just, this is just to attach the rules of decorum.
The rules of decorum, uh, are, is the document
that was adopted by the board at our retreat.
And to formalize that
and make that part of that ethics policy.
It will be contin, it will be voted on as an exhibit.
So that's it. I guess the other thing is to just say,
we did have discussion, uh, very early on discussion, uh,
about the item
that came from the main school board association about, uh,
a cell phone policy that a cell phone ruling
that could potentially happen, uh, by the governor,
where there could be a mandate of a bell to bell, uh,
prohibition of cell phones.
That has not happened. We don't know that it will happen.
Um, and while we also certainly think
that the cell phone policy is a critical one, we have a lot
of things on our plate right now.
So it's not anything that we're going
to really attack in the policy committee at this moment.
And we know that the high school is already working on a
procedure that they use at present, um,
that could happen at the middle school as well.
And that, that's going, it's going
to be an ongoing issue for sure.
So it will come back to us, but it's just not a front
and center at this moment.
So, thank you.
Um, and, uh,
you received the minutes for the Buildings
and Grounds Committee by, uh, board Member Dowling.
And, um, if anybody,
does anybody have any questions about that?
I, I, I just wanted to clarify that, um,
that was not my understanding at the policy committee
that we were, um, you know, that we had decided to,
to kind of table the cell phone policy discussion.
So, um, I,
I do wanna understand kind of the process.
I mean, I don't get me wrong.
I know we have a very full plate for the next three
to four months, but can we identify June
as the time that we would discuss that
as the policy committee?
I, I'd like to, I, I, I'd like to,
to talk about how we kind of,
We can talk about that at policy committee,
but that, that was just a decision that was made, uh,
after consultation with the sup,
with the interim superintendent, so
that this is not the time for us to take that, that on.
And that sometime probably
after the hiring of a superintendent
or, you know, late spring, early summer,
that could be reconsidered.
But there's a number of other policies that are going
to be reviewed by the policy committee.
First,
What is the format in which we can decide as a board
that it is a priority for the policy committee?
I'm gonna turn that to you, superintendent, if,
and you can speak to the issue of the school board,
a cell phone policy as well.
So, I mean, the, if the board decides as a, as a whole
that they're, they may want to prioritize something, then,
um, that certainly would prioritize it, I guess.
And, and what is the mechanism in which we
can do that as a board?
I, I think it would be to ensure that
a motion gets on the, um, agenda and say, and,
and it would be treated like, uh, the other, uh, pieces
that I'm gonna be reading, um, shortly here.
So it would be something
that we could put on the agenda at the policy committee,
and there would have to be two of the three members of the
board who are on the policy committee who want to move
that forward for an action by the board.
So we can talk about that at policy. Um, Mr.
Uh, Mr. Superintendent?
Yes. Uh, we're moving on to consent agenda. Oh, yes. Okay.
Um, I'll, uh,
I think we have a question over here.
Sorry. Sorry. Yes. So,
Uh, I, I hope we can,
because the, the, um, having a policy on, um,
on cell phones is gonna take a lot of work.
I mean, it's because we have
to figure out what the system is.
Uh, do we, is there anything we have to buy?
And how, my gosh, could we ever afford it?
And all those things. I, I do think we need time,
and I want, I wanna do it.
Well, the people, some of the really important stakeholders,
namely the teachers and staff are with us,
not when they're on vacation.
So I feel it's very important for us
to not let it go too long.
And I'm glad that if you think we can get
to it in the spring, 'cause it just wouldn't be fair.
And I don't think we wanna go another school year without
having addressed it, whether or not the state does.
That's you, superintendent.
Okay. Um, so I will read the consent agenda.
I think that's how we do it. Um, item 7.1, approval
of the minutes from the regular meeting held on
January 12th, 2026.
Item 7.2, approval
of the minutes from the board workshop held on
January 14th, 26.
Uh, item 7.3, approval
of the minutes from the emergency board meeting held on
January 24, 26.
Item 7.4, consideration
and action to approve the following personnel election.
Morgan Brunell, science teacher, south Portland High School.
It's a one year position through the end
of the 25 26 school year.
Uh, item 7.5, approval of the donation,
donations and grants.
Here we go. Uh, $1,120 from the Inn by the C
through their book for b for booking fundraiser
for South Portland School libraries to purchase new books.
$1,000 from the salvage salvage family.
Uh, Turkey Trot Fund for the South Portland's students, uh,
care club at South Portland High School to purchase fresh
food, produce and other necessities
to keep the little kitchen going during vulnerable times.
A fully funded project from donors choose $629
and 81 cent value initiated by Mike McCann to acquire
iPad stylists to increase digital
learning at South Portland Middle School.
Uh, second to last is $1,000 from Trade Trademark Credit
Union for the South Portland Middle School.
And the last is $538
and 31 cents from Shutterfly in Lifetouch
for Keeler Elementary School.
Thank you. If I can have a motion
to approve the consent agenda.
Uh, moved by, uh, member Holman
and a second, um, by Member Smith.
Any discussion? A member Holman?
Nope. No discussion. Member Smith,
I have something to say.
Yes. Um, I just wanted to say thank you
to obviously all the donors
and, uh, specifically the Savage Family Turkey Trot Fund
for helping the little kitchen to keep going,
because this is something that's been
very successful here at Southfield and High School.
Um, this is a space where like a lot
of students are bonding together
and they're bonding with like new teachers
that they haven't like never met
before, having conversations, a place
where there's no judgment.
Like you can just take as much food as you want,
as many things as you want.
So I just wanted to say thank you for that donation.
Thank you. Thank you. Member kbi.
Um, there's no further discussion.
All those in favor of approving the consent,
Calen the consent agenda, and that's unanimous and opposed.
Thank you. Okay. So we are up to new business.
The first is consideration
and action to approve as a first read policy, BEDH,
which is public participation at board meetings.
Could I have a motion to approve that policy?
First read, uh, member moved by Member Richardson.
And a second by Member Feller. Uh, any discussion?
Member Richardson? No. Member fella. Okay.
And all those in favor? Uh, that's unanimous. Any opposed?
Okay. The second is consideration and action.
To add the Rules of Decorum as an addendum
to the ethics policy, I have a motion to,
uh, approve that.
Moved by, uh, member Holman and seconded by Member Feller.
Any discussion? Okay. All those in favor?
And opposed? And that is unanimous as well.
Uh, consideration and action.
To approve and adapt, uh, that should be adopt the, uh,
26 27 school year calendar
with one additional school day
as captured in the newly updated Labor agreements.
If I can have a motion to accept the new calendar.
Uh, move by Member Feller. And seconded by Member Smith.
Thank you. Any discussion? Okay.
And all those in favor?
And opposed, and that is also unanimous consideration
and action for South Portland Schools
to become a community school district.
I have a motion to approve.
Moved by Member Feller and seconded by Member Smith.
Uh, member Feller. Do you wanna speak to that?
Uh, it was a, a great presentation.
Um, the outcomes look really promising,
and just thanks for all the hard work.
Very, really excited about this.
Member Smith. Seconded. Thank you. All those in favor?
And opposed? And that is also unanimous,
uh, consideration and action.
To approve the South Portland High School Adventure Clubs
Overnight field trip for students to go
to Carib Bassett Valley from February 28th
to March 1st, 2026.
If I can have a motion to approve.
Moved by Member Feller and seconded by Member Smith.
And any discussion. Seeing none. All those in favor?
And opposed, that is also
unanimous consideration and action.
To approve the South Portland High School overnight field
trip for the 11th and 12th grade students
to participate in the A CDA Eastern Region Honor Choir
Festival in Providence, Rhode Island from
February 25th to the 28th.
2026. If I can have a motion to approve.
Move by Member Feller. He's on a roll.
And, um, seconded by Member Richardson.
Any discussion? Seeing none. All those in favor?
And opposed, and that is also unanimous.
All of these have had the support
of our student member as well.
Um, the next one is consideration
and action for the Southport School Board
to approve a one-time exception
to the administrative procedure,
prohibiting student representatives on the board from
participating in executive session, which is, uh, our policy
BB AB B dash R.
In order to enable our student representatives
to personally meet with the semi-finalists
for the superintendent position,
provided that the following conditions
are strictly observed.
First, the student representatives must attend training on
confidentiality and bias in the hiring process,
the student representatives.
Second, the student's representatives must agree in writing,
not to discuss or
to share any information about the candidates
with any individual peers, family member, staff,
or citizens outside of executive session.
And must alert the board chair
and vice chair immediately of any inquiries for them
to share information.
Third, the student representatives will not be involved in
deliberations with the school board and will have no vote.
Fourth, the student representatives must be available
to meet with each semi-finalists.
And fifth, the no candidate expresses an objection
to this arrangement.
And I will move this motion up so that I can speak to it.
And if I can have a second, uh, member Smith.
Um, I will say that I met with members,
uh, KAA and Davison,
and they expressed a sincere interest in wanting
to be involved in this process
of our superintendent selection.
So we went through a number
of the ways that that could happen.
We have a policy right now that does not allow,
which complies with state law that does not allow students,
student members, uh, to be part of executive sessions.
So this is a one time exception.
I worked on these conditions with our legal counsel as well
to ensure that we were following all,
um, standards of process.
So to just go over them again, first,
that the students were both committed to
and would have to attend the training on
confidentiality and bias.
Uh, that is going to be,
the bias training is gonna be happening with Jimenez Apollo,
and that's a three hour training.
They both committed to that.
They would agree in writing, um, not
to discuss any information
as all board members are obligated to do the same.
Uh, our legal counsel would establish a document
that the student representatives would sign
and would agree that if they were approached
or questioned about any information, that they would report
that to the chair and vice chair,
and that they would not, uh,
disclose any information from executive session.
They would not be involved in deliberations.
So how this would happen is that the students would be
with us for the interviews,
for all the semifinals candidates.
They would need to be present for each semifinalist.
They could not only be able, like, I can attend for Tom
and Sally, but I can't be here for this one.
They have to be there for all candidates.
Following those interviews, the board would ask
for the input and thoughts
and, um, reactions from both members,
Kabisa and Davison.
And then they would leave the executive session.
The board would then be obligated to
partake in deciding the finalists for that.
But the students would not be any part of that process.
They wouldn't give any vote.
They would not participate in that in any way.
And they would not be part of the interviewing
of the finalist candidates.
That would be just the board.
Uh, as so as I said, they must be available
for each semi-finalist.
And, um, what we would, I've discussed this also with, uh,
zeal, and they would be sure that there is not
a candidate who objects to this arrangement.
So all the candidates would be told it's our, it's our, um,
plan to involve our students.
And if there was any candidate who was uncomfortable
or who objected to that,
they would not partake of that interview.
So, um, I wanna see if there's any questions
that people have about that.
And I want to also first give Angela a chance to speak.
Um, I just wanted to say that Alex
and I are very, uh, grateful for the consideration for us
to be a part of executive session.
Um, but a question that we did have, like, especially
with like the legal stuff, since you know,
we are representing the students
and we want like, student input on this, is it okay for us
to ask questions to students like
what they'd wanna see in their next superintendent?
Like that type of stuff?
Absolutely. So that, and you should be,
you should have scheduled a time to be interviewed
by the Zeal candidates, the Zeal team as well.
Both you and, um, member Davidson were, were
sent an email to set up a time so that you have, uh,
a virtual meeting with them.
And you'll have an opportunity, either you had it today
or you'll have it tomorrow.
Tomorrow to also, is it tomorrow? Yeah, I do.
To, uh, to get input.
So you can certainly talk with, um,
with anybody and anybody.
Uh, the, the students can also
participate in Thought Exchange.
They can participate tomorrow.
So you can get, it's just
that once we begin this interview process,
you will be getting information about these candidates
that you cannot share with anyone,
that you cannot discuss with anyone.
And, um, so you can get input from
students prior to the interviews.
Just you cannot share any information about the
interviews. Okay.
Thank you. Yes. Um, member Holman, I, um,
I just wanna say I think this is a great idea.
I'm very much supportive of it,
and, uh, I know that it's a city charter, ma, ma matter,
but I wish that our students' votes did count.
I think it's too bad that their votes don't count. It.
Don't, I wish that could be changed someday.
That's state law, but, okay. Oh, city
Charter. That's
What I was told. Yeah, it's
with the city charter,
but it's also, there is also law about it.
I still wish it could be changed. Yeah.
Um, speak to your representatives. That's how it happens.
Any other questions, comments?
No, I think this is, I I think this is really awesome
and I appreciate you going through the Yeah.
Red tape to
Make it happen. Yeah, it was a
little bit more challenging than I had
expected, but, uh,
but both of them were very interested in being part of this,
and so I thought it was important.
Yeah. So did pursue that. So thank you. Great. Thank you.
Um, there's no further comments or we can take a vote.
All those in favor of this and that is, and opposed?
So that's unanimous, including the student vote, um,
consideration and action for the South Portland School Board
to endorse and give its full support
to the South Portland City Council.
Resolve number 5 25 26, which was distributed to everybody.
And there was a link on the city,
on the school website passed unanimously on
Tuesday, February 3rd.
This resolve entitled the City of South Portland Resolution
regarding federal immigration enforcement activity
and community safety
and wellbeing addresses the impact felt recently
by our immigrant community, including our students.
Um, motion. Yeah.
Member Richardson
and I, I will second that.
Uh, member Richardson.
Um, I'm, I'm,
I'm glad to see the board taking formal action, recognizing,
um, the really
intense traumatic experience our community went
through this past, um, several weeks.
Um, I am grateful
for the community of South Portland for, um,
protecting their neighbors, uh, supporting their neighbors.
Um, I, I think that it's important
to make public statements in this way,
but I also think that there are a lot of ways that, um,
we can actually be doing something
concrete and, and helpful.
So, um, please talk to your community,
uh, friends, talk to your teachers, ask
how you might be able to get involved to support, um,
to support your, uh, your, if you're,
if you have a student, you know, your, your, your, your son
or daughter's classmate, um, who, um,
I, I'm, I'm, I'm kind of speechless about what we just,
what we're enduring as a community.
I just, I, I wanna give it the space
and recognition that it, that it deserves
because, um, no, you know, no,
no child should be afraid to leave their home
and come to school ever.
Um, and yet we experienced that.
Um, and, and the way that our staff
and our teachers rose to that occasion.
And, um, greeted
literally like walked these children to their homes,
you know, from, from riding the buses with them.
And, um, you know, again, the,
the responsibilities that you hold, um, are
way more than than what your job description,
how your job description reads.
So, um, I'm really proud of our community.
Um, I think that, um, you know, anytime
that, that we come together,
like this just makes us, uh, better.
Um, and, um, again, I, I am,
and I'm so psyched about the little kitchen.
I took a picture of it. I'm gonna show, um, show some
of my friends who have been.
So, thank you. Anyway, I'm, I'm,
but thank you for putting this on the agenda.
Thank you. I was in attendance at the city council meeting
when this resolve came forth,
and I felt that it was, I was pleased
that the amendment passed that wa that was to, um,
support action to approach the governor
and ask for there
to be a moratorium on the eviction process for 60 days.
We don't know that that will happen,
but we know that there will be an approach that will be made
by our local leaders.
I did then meet with, um, mayor Tipton to talk about
the school board giving an endorsement of this.
And I felt that it was important for us to publicly state
that this really had significant impact on our,
uh, immigrant refugee
and asylum students from families who are deeply affected
by what is happening.
Um, I know there are other members on this board who are
doing actions, um,
and I have been getting up at six o'clock in the morning
to drive someone to work, which is why I like,
this is why I said boundaries and configurations.
You know, my mind is not really clear.
Uh, but I, I think that it's important
that this board take an action of support for
what the city council, uh, move to do
and for their resolve
and to say, we see it, we recognize it, we acknowledge it,
and we also give you are, uh, full support.
So I, I concur with what a member Richardson said.
Um, are there other comments about this?
Seeing none. All those in favor and those opposed,
and that is also unanimous.
Thank you. Um, consideration
and approval to request the superintendent
to produce a formal proposal related to the benefits
and impact of the elementary school configuration
to be presented and discussed at the budget one
workshop on March 2nd, 2026.
I have a motion to put that on the table.
Uh, moved by Member Feller
and seconded by Member Richardson.
Uh, member Feller.
Yeah. So, you know, this was the first idea
for cost savings presented at the budget form.
Um, I've certainly heard a lot about this
from folks in South Portland.
I'm sure other members of the boards have as well.
Um, most folks who have reached out
to me have not been in favor of this.
You know, I think it's a pretty,
it's a pretty specific group of people
that are not happy about this.
Um, but this is a big decision.
You know, like we've had neighborhoods, schools for decades
and decades in South Portland
and reconfiguration,
I dunno if you wanna call it consolidation,
but reconfiguration would be changing
that to an extent, right?
There would still be neighborhood schools,
but it would be different than it's been for a long time.
So this is a big decision. Um, I just wanna say this,
this can't be a decision that's made
by the central office in the school board, right?
We need a ton of community input.
I think we're all open for ways
that this could be a community led decision.
Um, I just, yeah, this, we need
to have a really big tent for this.
I think we need to increase awareness
of the budget reality that we're in.
And I think people will understand why,
why we might be moving this way.
But, you know, I'm, I'm all for a formal study.
Um, I really want to understand
where the cost savings are coming from.
I think a lot of people share that sentiment.
Um, but yeah, I mean, I think, you know, it's a,
it's a proposal that merits are consideration,
but, um, you know, I'm not like in favor of it today, right?
It's something to think about and discuss.
Thank you. Member Richardson.
Um, yeah, I concur with, um, what Member Feller just said.
I, I really think we need to give this particular proposal,
the time and the space, um,
and the data to really, to really talk through
with this proposal, um, how this proposal's gonna work
and, um, and, and what is the breakdown of the savings
and, and, and how much is it gonna cost for us to,
what is the startup cost for kind of investing in,
in this particular change.
Um, and you know, I I, I encourage the community
to, to show up at this workshop, to, to keep,
to keep emailing the board with your concerns.
Um, I think, I think the more, um,
we can focus on the data and, um, is really important.
I also asked that at this workshop we see, um,
not just this proposal, but,
but kind of an under, uh, kind of a nod to why closing one
of the elementary schools has just was kind of concluded
as not a viable option.
And I think we need to understand why
and what those, you know, kind of what those,
what the assumptions were about why
that wasn't the right choice.
And so I've asked that that also be, um, presented at,
at the workshop on March 2nd. Thank you.
Thank you. Other comments?
No, I mean,
I, I think it's great that
we're going forward to look at this.
That's all.
Uh, I, I, I will make some comments about this.
I think this is a fabulous idea.
So I'm gonna just put it out there.
I'm totally in support of this.
I'm there, there are some educators up here,
and as one of them, uh, I think
what I always think about when I think about change
is what's good for kids.
And I think this is good for kids.
I think this is going to make positive if we approve it.
Um, I would say to member fellow, um, that,
that, that the neighborhood,
we don't have neighborhood schools anymore.
When I came here in 1977, there were 11 schools.
We had neighborhood schools.
Then if you look at the top of meeting House Hill
and you say there was a school across from De
Petro, so that was Willard School.
There was Roosevelt School on Pine Street
and small school existed.
You could throw a rock from each one that that's when
over 95% of our students were walkers.
That's not what we have today.
So we have five schools, we've eliminated six schools,
and we eliminated them all by 90, 99.
So we've really only had five elementary schools,
or we've had five elementary schools for the past 25 years.
So, uh, in my mind, they're not neighborhood schools.
There are some neighborhoods where some kids get to walk
that, that, and that's great.
But, um, but even if we were to approve a, a,
a reconfiguration there,
there will still be kids who can walk.
You know, there will be kids who walk,
whether there the school in their neighborhood is either
based on the ideas that have been discussed at the forum,
that if there, if there were schools that were pre-K, k
and one in schools that were two, three,
and four, your neighborhood,
your neighborhood school is going to be one of those,
and your kids will walk during that time.
The other thing I would say is I've talked with a number
of teachers who also think this is a great idea.
And I've talked to parents who say, you know,
is there gonna be busing
provided to get my kids from here to there?
Yes. And they're fine. You know, they're fine.
I would say, in my experience, of over 45 years
of being an educator,
that kids are far more flexible than parents.
Um, parents have a lot more anxiety
and fear that gets put on kids.
And that's because we're adults
and we've learned what there is to be fearful of.
You know, like I learned skiing when I was already old
enough to be afraid of falling down,
but I would see little kids on the mountain
who were just zooming about, like,
they're only gonna fall this far.
And I don't have much farther to fall than they do anyway.
But, um,
but they're, they're not falling very far and they're not fearful.
So, uh, I, I am in, in support of this and,
but because I think it's good for kids,
and I think that there's a lot
of benefits to looking at this.
So this board is going to have to make a decision.
Like we have to cut money from the budget
so we can get input from the public
and we can encourage people to come to meetings
and to speak, but this board is
gonna have to make that decision.
I mean, there's not gonna, there's not gonna be like a
public referendum vote.
It's, that's not gonna happen.
So, um, it's, it's the, it's the tough job
of sitting up here, but we're going to have to make
some decisions about that.
And I don't know how that will go.
But you've heard,
you've heard my opinion right here tonight, so thank you
Rosemary, all the Yes.
Okay. Nevermind. No, I, I just, I try
to go last, I try to go last.
Mayor Holman. So that's why I asked.
Were there any other comments?
Because that's the appropriate role of the chair to go last,
but nevermind all those in favor,
moving this forward and opposed.
Okay. And that is also unanimous.
We are up to the second public discussion,
and I think there are,
there is at least one person who wants to speak.
Am I correct? Maybe two. Okay, great.
So the public comment portion
of the agenda is an opportunity for the board to listen
to opinions of the public related to school
and education matters, on or off the agenda.
The board is here to listen.
Anyone wishing to speak will be asked
to proceed to the microphone.
State your name and the town or city where you reside.
You have three minutes to speak.
We ask that there be no booing
or clapping to anybody's comments.
And as a reminder, board meetings are broadcast, live,
recorded, and posted on the city's website.
So just please use that
as you consider the impact of your comments.
And, uh, Ms. Gay,
Good evening, um, Sergey, SPTA, president,
parent Teacher, taxpayer, all that fun stuff.
Um, on behalf of the SPTA, I would like
to make a public request for our school board
to make a public request of the city council
for a more precise target tax percent.
Um, this is something that I know has been discussed
and we have not received any, a specific number
or a specific target.
Um, I think the, the uncertainty around
the actual amount of cuts that are potentially needed
and where those will need to happen, um, well,
the actual cuts will probably be worse,
but the anticipation's pretty rough
and I think at this point, having a clearer sense of exactly
what we have to react to, um,
is becoming more and more urgent.
Um, uh, so as far as our staff potential to adapt
and thrive through change, I'm about to try skiing
for the first time next week.
I'm very anxious. I just have to put that out there.
Um, but that feels like a very apt metaphor to me.
I think staff generally are aware
that we are falling very far.
Um, and we are very fearful. We are very concerned.
Um, I do feel the need to respond to the rumor
that educators have expressed some kind
of unified support for any of these plans.
No, I wasn't saying that. Oh, no, not, not that. Oh, okay.
But that has been shared elsewhere.
Um, that is not the case.
We are not going to endorse plans
that result in our colleagues losing their jobs.
Um, we will support the plans in action when they
exist and are cohesive.
And when we've been able to share our feedback on the
impacts and negotiating the necessary changes, um,
I do feel the need to point out, not for the benefit
of the board, but for folks who may be listening in, um,
part of our union's responsibility is to bargain the impact
of changes to teacher working conditions when they arise.
Um, even the general plans we've considered so far are going
to require bargaining with all of our staff unions, um,
before they can be implemented.
And just a general note, this is mostly a reminder to me
and my colleagues that we are going to need
to also reopen our contract in March
to negotiate in updated, uh,
paid family medical leave information.
Um, last things to share.
I've been asked to share several sort of common areas
of concern that have been expressed to our representatives
and to our officers, um, in the hopes
that our leaders at different levels can address, um, these,
these concerns in some way, hopefully as soon as possible.
Um, concerns about the quick turnaround that we are going
to need to create and implement.
Uh, oh, 30 seconds plans of this scale prior to September.
Concerns about mental health impacts on staff
and students, um, worry about the imbalance of changes.
Some are higher impact for some staff, but not others.
Timeline for notification for teachers
who may not have positions next year.
Staff in general, apologies.
Um, students and staff losing access to safe adults
and communities they've built relationships with
and general disappointment
that there is an emphasis on enrollment CHA changes
and increased staffing costs as drivers of budgetary change.
Um, rather than other financial considerations though,
I wrote that comment before Abby
spoke and through minutes. Thank
You, Abby. Sarah,
thank
You. Then I'll pass
this all off to Miami.
Hi there. Um, I'm Abby Anderson.
I am one of the SPTA VPs, um, also live in South Portland.
Uh, I just had a few questions
regarding the community school expansion to the high school.
So I have three questions.
Um, can the community school funds be used
to provide classroom materials like books
and other supplies, um, currently provided by the district?
Uh, question two, can it help to fund any staff salaries
beyond the community school staff?
Question three. Uh, I just wanted
to clarify the mission statement for the ED foundation
that was on the one of the slides.
Um, will the ED Foundation exist only to support, uh,
or fund the community school programming,
or will it serve our school in other ways?
Um, those are my questions.
So I'm gonna pivot now to, sorry,
Abby, will you just give that third question again,
The third one? Sure. Um, a little
Bit slower.
Sure. Uh, will the ED Foundation exist only
to support the community school programming,
or will it serve our schools in other ways?
Uh, did you get the first two as well? Yeah, I did.
Okay, perfect. Uh, uh,
and I just wanna pivot now to say thank you to, uh,
Abigail Ketin for all of your careful work related
to the budget, um,
and the fiscal responsibility of, of this district.
Um, greatly appreciate your honesty about the numbers
and the gravity of the situation, uh, as well
as your problem solving and strategic thinking.
It's just incredible to have.
Uh, finally, we are lucky
to have your stewardship throughout this ongoing budget
process, and I think all
of us truly appreciate your commitment
to the long-term financial solvency of this district.
So please don't leave. Um, also,
I look, we made a 10 year commitment tonight.
Yeah, I did hear that. You can consider
us Hotel California.
You can go home, but you can't leave.
Um, uh, so lastly, uh, just a plug for our,
um, some of the parent
and community, uh, groups that have mobilized due
to, uh, immigration.
Um, we have our SoPo help group is trying
to raise $21,000 in the next 48 hours
to help provide rent relief, um, targeting families
with school aged children who are facing evictions.
So we're trying to help these, these folks.
Um, so if you would like to help, you can Venmo,
it's at SoPo helps two, so it's SOPO helps.
Two. Thank you.
Anyone else? Seeing none.
Public comment is closed. Um, Mr.
Superintendent, there were some questions that were asked.
Are you, do you want to answer them
or do you want, or do you want Dr.
Stern to come up and answer them?
I would pass the buck if I were you.
Um, I,
I think we could probably get back
with some better answers if we had a, had an opportunity
to confer and get back to Abby.
Is that, is that, is that acceptable?
Abby, what would you We'll take your questions
and get back to you at a later time.
Totally fine. Thank you.
And for others who have questions, uh, if you go on the,
uh, website
and you go to the budget page, right on the bottom,
there's a nice area to, uh, fill out any questions
or requests for, uh, data.
Um, uh, Dr. Prince tells me that we've got at least,
uh, five pages of,
And Dr. Prince tells me she doesn't want any more
questions, so I don't know why you're
promoting this, but No,
It's, um, it's just, it's just an
easier way, just teasing, I'm teasing.
Easier way for us to have things in writing and, um,
and to look at the similarities,
because they'll probably be frequently asked questions
and we will use that opportunity to, um, pick through them
and, um, and,
and present an answers back in that way. So thank you.
Thank you. We are up to school board communication, uh,
um, board member feller.
Um, this will just take a minute.
I just have three things to speak on.
You know, the first thing is we had our December, um,
budget workshop where we looked at the numbers
and we were all on the school board asked kind of
what percentage, uh,
increase in taxes we'd be comfortable with.
I think a lot of us said 0%. A lot of us said 3%.
Um, I don't, in my reasoning,
that's not a reality now.
Um, I don't want a double digit increase in, uh, the budget,
but like, it's probably gonna, I,
I would be more comfortable
with something exceeding 6% than I was before, right?
Covering a $7 million shortfall in a way
that's not draconian.
Uh, I just, like, I
don't understand how we're gonna do that.
So I, I think
the tax increase will be larger
than previously contemplated.
So that's the first thing I wanna say.
And other people on the board
likely disagree with me on that.
Um, the second I think we as the board need
to do a better job increasing the awareness
of the budget situation.
Um, a lot of people are surprised when I talk
to them about this and they don't understand why we're in
this situation.
And, um, there's kind of defaulting that.
It's like the leadership in the district, you know, I,
this is a situation that's been handed to a lot of us.
So I think we really, I don't know how we're gonna do this.
We need to think constructively.
How do we make sure
that we're not surprising anybody when cuts happen
or taxes increase?
And the final thing we,
and I know I think we're gonna do this,
but we, we should really talk
to our legal counsel about early retirement buyouts.
So there's 41 retirement stipend eligible staff.
Um, if we could somehow incentivize those folks
to take a early retirement by increasing the stipend,
even if just 20 of those 41 retirement eligible individuals,
uh, takes that buyout, let's say conservative estimate,
we reduce spending on benefits
and salaries by $50,000 per individual,
and 50% of the retirement eligible folks take that,
that would yield a savings in excess of a million dollars.
So, um, I think we need
to look really hard at the early retirement buyouts.
That's all I have to say. Thanks.
Thank you. Uh, member Richardson,
Um, I, I, I, I agree
a lot with what you just said.
Member feller and I, um, was saying this to,
to somebody earlier today, how we really need to tell
the story about the $7 million shortfall better.
Um, what does it represent?
Um, you know, for example, we, um, with our
contract negotiations, we increased teachers
and staff, um, salaries,
and there was a consequence to that.
Um, I don't think that
that was conveyed in those negotiations the way
that I would've liked to have conveyed that.
Um, because, um,
but I think from the community standpoint,
and I know a lot of people in this community, particularly
with children in the schools, and we all want our teachers
and staff to be paid, you know,
more than they are getting, right?
I mean, that is, that is, um, that is something that,
that I think the community supports.
So again, telling the story of what, of what
that $7 million shortfall represents is, is, is significant.
And I know we're targeting a potential
12% increase in benefits.
Um, the way that we,
and also our student need population is very different than
it was eight years ago, nine years ago, 10 years ago.
So, um,
and we all are living the life of knowing
that everything is more expensive,
but we can't just say that we've really gotta,
we really have to spell this out better.
And, and I have the, I have the utmost faith that our, um,
administration team can do that.
But, um, but we are in a really,
really complicated, tough situation.
Um, regarding the, the increase, I believe
as a board we did kind of informally agree to a 6% increase.
Um, and tomorrow at the city council meeting,
I think we'll kind of rub, get that rubber stamped,
or perhaps it will be more or less.
Um, so I'd love Chair DeAngelos to kind
of flesh that out a bit for us as far as, you know,
what are, you know, are, do we really have flexibility
to go over 6%?
Um, because I think we actually made that decision already.
Um, and
Yeah, thank you.
Thank you. Other members, member Holman?
No, uh, I will just say, I wanted
to answer a, a, a question that I think was asked by, um,
Sergey about what happens tomorrow night.
So what happens tomorrow night at the council?
And this answers what, uh, member Richardson just asked.
The council goes before, I mean, the school board goes
before the council or whoever comes,
the school board is not obligated to be there,
but there will be a presentation to the council
that will include, um, some of the slides
that were used at the forum, primarily the, the one
that has the pie chart on it.
Um, and so it will show here's what, here's
what the guidance has been given by the, by the board.
Um, the city council
has the authority to say, well, we,
we think you need to cut even more than that.
They can say, we think we need to give you more, more than,
I mean, they can come in anywhere
and they can come in with saying
what they have done in the past, which I hope they don't do,
is to say, do the best you can.
So I think that that's what, um,
Sergei was asking about is,
and I have said to, uh, several of the counselors
and to Mayor Tipton,
that the school board would really like specific guidance.
I've heard things like, well, we don't know your budget.
How can we do that? That's not
what I believe is the responsibility of the city council.
The responsibility of the city council is to determine
what can the public bear, what can they uphold?
They don't need to know our budget. That's our job to do.
And that's for the superintendent
and the leadership team to present us with ideas.
But I do believe it's the council's job
to give us some specific guidance to us,
because just turning that out
to the voters is not a,
is not in my view, a reasonable thing.
So we'll talk about that tomorrow night, uh,
at the council meeting.
And, um, and it's a very informal workshop.
It's not, there's not a formal action that's taken
by the council, um, that they go around it, it's sort
of a round table, and they go around
and tell us what they, what they think,
and how they feel about it.
So, um, you know, you're welcome to be there
or you're welcome to tune in and watch it live streamed.
But, um, yeah.
And, and I think, uh, I did wanna respond to, um,
member filler's request about the buyout.
It's not really legal counsel. We need to talk to.
It's the main state retirement system.
That's where the limits are,
and that's where the guidelines are set.
And so it doesn't have to do with anything else except
what the rules are of the main state retirement
and to
what extent we can even use any level of buyout.
Um, so that's, that's where we can, that's
where we can get that information.
Um, but it's, but it's pretty limited.
Um, so if there's no other comments
without objection, I'm gonna adjourn the meeting.
Thank you. Thank you.